PROJECT REPORT

1. The Problem
Drawing with a mouse feels unnatural and excludes people with motor impairments. I wanted to build a contactless drawing interface using just hand gestures—no mouse, no touchscreen, just your hand in front of a webcam.

Why it matters:

Makes digital art accessible to everyone

Enables hands-free interaction in sterile environments

Prepares for future gesture-based computing

2. My Approach
Core Idea
Webcam → MediaPipe tracks hand → Detect gestures → Draw on virtual canvas

Two Simple Gestures
Select Tool: Hover index finger over toolbar (left side) for 0.8 seconds

Draw: Lift index finger 40px above middle finger

Five Tools
text
Toolbar Zones (from left):
├─ Line      → Drag preview, drop to commit
├─ Rectangle → Same drag-drop pattern
├─ Draw      → Freehand while finger raised
├─ Circle    → Radius = distance from start
└─ Erase     → 30px circular eraser
The Mask Trick
Instead of drawing on the video frame (which resets every frame), I use a separate mask:

python
mask = np.ones((frame_h, frame_w)) * 255  # White = visible
cv2.bitwise_and(frame, frame, mask=mask)   # Black pixels disappear
Drawings persist, erasing is just painting white, and previews stay temporary.

3. Key Decisions
Single Hand Only

python
options = vision.HandLandmarkerOptions(..., num_hands=1)
Why: Two hands killed performance on my laptop. One hand = smooth 30fps.

Simple Vertical Gap Detection

python
def index_raised(yi, y9):
    return (y9 - yi) > 40
Why: Angle calculations were buggy. Vertical distance works for all hand sizes.

0.8s Dwell Time
Why: Fast enough to feel responsive, slow enough to prevent accidental switches. The shrinking yellow circle gives visual feedback.

Preview-Before-Commit
Why: Users see exactly what they'll draw before it's permanent. Builds confidence.

4. Challenges & Fixes
Problem	Solution
Jittery lines	Kept 0.6 confidence + tracked from previous position
Accidental tool switches	Added margin check: x > ml
Drawings not showing	Fixed: update prevx, prevy even when not drawing
Lag (15fps)	Switched to MediaPipe Tasks API (30% faster)
5. What I Learned
Technical:

MediaPipe Tasks API > Legacy MediaPipe (faster, cleaner)

Mask operations enable non-destructive editing

Simple thresholds beat complex ML for gestures

Design:

Visual feedback is non-negotiable (shrinking circle, previews)

State machines prevent buggy code

Test with different hand sizes early (my 40px threshold was too small for big hands)

6. Results
On my laptop (Intel i5, 8GB RAM):

Metric	Result
Frame Rate	28-32 fps
Gesture Accuracy	~90%
Drawing Latency	Feels instant
Works: Freehand drawing, shapes, erasing, tool switching
Doesn't Work Yet: Colors, save/load, undo, low-light tracking

7. Limitations & Next Steps
Current Limits:

Needs good lighting

Fixed 40px threshold (no calibration)

No save feature

Single color (yellow/green only)

Planned:

Color picker with second hand

Save drawings as PNG

Adaptive calibration for hand sizes

Undo/redo stack

Brush size control via pinch gesture

8. Conclusion
This project proves natural gesture interfaces are finally practical. No special hardware—just a webcam and ~180 lines of Python. The preview-commit pattern + mask system creates a polished feel, and it runs smoothly on cheap hardware.

Proudest moments:

First perfect circle drawn mid-air

Friends "got it" instantly without instructions

Runs on any laptop

Total Time: ~40 hours over 3 weekends
Biggest Debug: 3 hours on mask coordinate mismatch
